# Supplemental material of published manuscripts

This directory contains scripts and files supporting publications from the Boutros lab.

### Rauscher, Heigwer et al., NAR 2016

[Rauscher, Heigwer, *et al.*](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/D1/D679/2333939/GenomeCRISPR-a-database-for-high-throughput-CRISPR), 2016, GenomeCRIPSR - a database for high-throughput CRISPR/Cas9 screens. Nucleic Acids Research

Over the past years, CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing has developed into a powerful tool for modifying genomes in various organisms. In high-throughput screens, CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene perturbations can be used for the systematic functional analysis of whole genomes. Discoveries from such screens provide a wealth of knowledge about gene to phenotype relationships in various biological model systems. However, a database resource to query results efficiently has been lacking. To this end, we developed GenomeCRISPR (http://genomecrispr.org), a database for genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 screens. Currently, GenomeCRISPR contains data on more than 550 000 single guide RNAs (sgRNA) derived from 84 different experiments performed in 48 different human cell lines, comprising all screens in human cells using CRISPR/Cas published to date. GenomeCRISPR provides data mining options and tools, such as gene or genomic region search. Phenotypic and genome track views allow users to investigate and compare the results of different screens, or the impact of different sgRNAs on the gene of interest. An Application Programming Interface (API) allows for automated data access and batch download. As more screening data will become available, we also aim at extending the database to include functional genomic data from other organisms and enable cross-species comparisons.

### Voloshanenko et al., FASEB 2017

[Voloshanenko *et al.*](http://www.fasebj.org/content/early/2017/07/21/fj.201700144R.abstract), 2017, Mapping of Wnt-Frizzled interactions by multiplex CRISPR targeting of receptor gene families. The FASEB journal

Signaling pathway modules are often encoded by several closely related paralogous genes that can have redundant roles and are therefore difficult to analyze by loss-of-function analysis. A typical example is the Wnt signaling pathway, which in mammals is mediated by 19 Wnt ligands that can bind to 10 Frizzled (FZD) receptors. Although significant progress in understanding Wnt-FZD receptor interactions has been made in recent years, tools to generate systematic interaction maps have been largely lacking. Here we generated cell lines with multiplex mutant alleles of FZD1, FZD2, and FZD7 and demonstrate that these cells are unresponsive to canonical Wnt ligands. Subsequently, we performed genetic rescue experiments with combinations of FZDs and canonical Wnts to create a functional ligand–receptor interaction map. These experiments showed that whereas several Wnt ligands, such as Wnt3a, induce signaling through a broad spectrum of FZD receptors, others, such as Wnt8a, act through a restricted set of FZD genes. Together, our results map functional interactions of FZDs and 10 Wnt ligands and demonstrate how multiplex targeting by clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 can be used to systematically elucidate the functions of multigene families.
